---
layout: post
title: "Heap: A Review"
date: 2019-05-07
mathjax: true
categories: Algorithm
---
## Status: not complete
## Introduction
------
A **heap** is a tree-based data structure which
1. satisfies the shape property: is an almost complete tree 

2. satisfies the heap property: in a max heap, for any given node ``C``, if ``P`` is a parent of ``C``, then the key of ``P`` is greated than or equal to the key of ``C``.

The heap is one maximally efficient implementation of a **priority queue**.

Heap is partially ordered; there is no implied ordering between siblings or cousins and no implied sequence of an in-order traversal. 

A heap is a useful data structure when it is necessary to repeatedly remove the object with the highest (or lowest) priority.

A **binary heap** is a heap that takes the form of a binary tree.

## Validate a Heap
------
# (1) Given an Array
Given an array of size ``n``, check if it represent a binary max heap.

# Implementation
An array will always satisfy the shape property of being a complete tree.

To check the heap property, we loop through the elements in the array and compare the value to that of its children. Notice that:

1. Suppose the root node is at index ``0`` with last node at index ``n-1``. Then for node at index ``i``, its parent node(if it has any) is at index ``(i-1)/2``, and its child nodes(if it has any) are at index ``2i+1`` and ``2i+2``.

2. Suppose the root node is at index ``1`` with last node at index ``n``. Then for node at index ``i``, its parent node(if it has any) is at index ``i/2``, and its child nodes (if it has any) are at index ``2i`` and ``2i+1``. 

3. Suppose the root node is at index ``0``. Then all the nodes with indices greater than ``(n-2)/2`` are leaf nodes. This is because $ 2(\frac{n-2}{2}) + 1 = n-1 $, which is already the index of the last element in the array.

4. Suppose the root node is at index ``0``. It is possible that the node at index ``(n-2)/2`` only has a left child.

One natural way is to loop through each elements in the array, treat it as the parent node and compare its value with that of its children's. 
{% highlight c %}
bool isHeap(int arr[], int n){
    for(int i=0; i<=(n-2)/2; i++){
        if (arr[i] < arr[2*i+1])    // max heap
            return false;
        if (2*i+2 <= n-1 && arr[i] < arr[2*i+2])
            return false;
    }
    return true;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Another approach is to loop through each element other than the first one, treat it as a child node and compare it to its parent. 
{% highlight c %}
bool isHeap(int arr[], int n){
    if (n <= 1)
        return true;
    for (int i=1; i<=n-1; i++){     // i start at 1
        if (arr[i] > arr[(i-1)/2])
            return false;
    }
    return true;
{% endhighlight %}

# (2) Given a Tree
Given a binary tree, check if it represents a binary max heap.

# Implementation
I think this is correct. 

{% highlight c %}
bool isHeap(struct node* root){
    if (root == NULL)
        return true;
    if (root->left == NULL && root->right == NULL)
        return true;
    if (root->left == NULL && root->right != NULL)
        return false;
    if (root->left != NULL && root->right == NULL)
        return (root->val > root->left->val) &&
                isHeap(root->left);

    return (root->val > root->left->val) &&
            (root->val > root->right->val) &&
            isHeap(root->left) &&
            isHeap(root->right);
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Insert
------ 
Let's first define two operations of a max heap.

``SiftUp``:  Swap a node that is too large with its parent until it is no larger than its parent.

``SiftDown``: Swap a node that is too small with its largest child until it is no smaller than either of its children. 

1. Add element to the end of the array
2. ``Siftup`` that element.

## Remove 
------
1. Remove root, and put the last element at root
2. ``SiftDown`` the new root element.

## Build a Heap
------

**Lemma1**: The number of internal nodes in a complete binary tree of $n$ nodes is $\lfloor n/2 \rfloor$.

**Lemma2**: A heap of size $n$ has at most $\lceil n/2^{h+1} \rceil$ nodes with height $h$.

**Proof**: 

Prove by induction.

**Base Case**: for $h=0$, i.e. the leaf nodes, we can get it from lemma1: 

$$ n - \lfloor n/2 \rfloor = \lceil n/2 \rceil $$

**Induction Step**: 





# Method 1
Starting with an empty heap and insert each element into it. 

Runtime: $O(nlogn)$
# Method 2
Note that both ``SiftUp`` and ``SiftDown`` has a runtime proportional to the height of the heap. Additionally, 


