---
layout: post
title: "A referesher on Asymptotic Notations, Loop Analysis and Runtime Analysis"
date: 2019-02-08
mathjax: true
categories: Algorithm
---
# Definitions
$\theta(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{there exists positive constants } c_1, c_2 \text{ and } n_0 \text{ such that } 0 \le c_1g(n) \le f(n) \le c_2g(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

$O(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{there exists positive constants } c \text{ and } n_0 \text{ such that } 0 \le f(n) \le cg(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

$o(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{for any positive constant } c > 0 \text{ there exists a constant } n_0 >0  \text{ such that } 0 \le f(n) \lt cg(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$


$\Omega(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{there exists positive constants } c \text{ and } n_0 \text{ such that } 0 \le cg(n) \le f(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

$\omega(g(n)) = \\{\, f(n) \mid \text{for any positive constant } c > 0 \text{ there exists a constant } n_0 >0  \text{ such that } 0 \le cg(n) \lt f(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0 \, \\}$

# How to Interpret Asymptotic Notations in Equations
**Rule 1**: When the asymptotic notation stands alone on the right side of an equation or inequality, equal sign means set membership.

**Example**: $n = O(n^2)$ means $n \in O(n^2)$.

**Rule 2**: In general, when asymptotic notation appears in a formula, we interpret it as standing for some anonymous function that we do not care to name. 

**Example**: $2n^2 + 3n + 1 = 2n^2 + \theta(n)$ means that $2n^2 + 3n + 1 = 2n^2 + f(n)$, where $f(n)$ is some function in the set $\theta(n)$ (in this case $f(n) = 3n + 1$).

**Example**: $T(n) = 2T(n/2) + \theta(n)$. 

**Rule 3**: The number of anonymous functions in an expression is equal to the number of times the asymptotic notations appears.

**Example**: in $\sum_{i=0}^n O(i)$, there is only a single anonymous function. This is not the same as $O(1) + O(2) + \cdots + O(n)$, which doesn't have a clear interpretation.

**Rule 4**: When the asymptotic notation appears on the left side of an equation or inequality, we interpret it as: No matter how the anonymous functions are chosen on the left side, there is a way to choose the anonymous functions on the right side to make the equation valid.

**Example**: $2n^2 + \theta(n) = \theta(n^2)$.
# Rules
**Transitivity**:

$f(n) = \theta(g(n))$ and $g(n) = \theta(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = \theta(h(n))$

$f(n) = O(g(n))$ and $g(n) = O(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = O(h(n))$

$f(n) = \Omega(g(n))$ and $g(n) = \Omega(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = \Omega(h(n))$

$f(n) = o(g(n))$ and $g(n) = o(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = o(h(n))$

$f(n) = \omega(g(n))$ and $g(n) = \omega(h(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) = \omega(h(n))$

**Reflexivity**:

$f(n) = \theta(f(n))$

$f(n) = O(f(n))$

$f(n) = \Omega(f(n))$

**Symmetry**:

$f(n) = \theta(g(n))$ if and only if $g(n) = \theta(f(n))$

**Related Theorem**:

$f(n) = \theta(g(n))$ if and only if $f(n) = O(g(n))$ and $f(n) = \Omega(g(n))$

**Transpose Symmetry**:

$f(n) = O(g(n))$ if and only if $g(n) = \Omega(f(n))$

$f(n) = o(g(n))$ if and only if $g(n) = \omega(f(n))$

**Trichotomy**:

For any two real numbers $a$ and $b$, exactly one of the following must hold: $$a < b, a = b, a > b$$.

However, not all functions are asymptotically comparable. That is, for two functions $f(n)$ and $g(n)$, it may be the case that neither $f(n) = O(g(n))$ nor $f(n) = \Omega(g(n))$ holds.

Example: $f(n) = n, g(n) = n^{1 + \sin n}$.

## Examples
**Example**: Let $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ be asymptotically nonnegative functions. Prove that $max(f(n), g(n)) = \theta(f(n) + g(n))$.

**Proof**: 

choose $n_0$ such that for all $n \ge n_0, f(n)$ and $g(n)$ are nonnegative. Then:

$max(f(n), g(n)) \le f(n) + g(n) \qquad \qquad$     [$f(n)$ and $g(n)$ are nonnegative]
$2max(f(n), g(n)) \ge f(n) + g(n) \qquad \qquad$    [property of max()]

Thus we have 
\\[
\frac{1}{2}(f(n) + g(n)) \le max(f(n), g(n) \le f(n) + g(n) \text{ for all } n \ge n_0
\\]
, which is the definition of $\theta(f(n) + g(n))$ with $c_1 = \frac{1}{2}$ and $c_2 = 1$.

**Example**: Let $f(n)$ and $g(n)$ be positive functions. Prove that $min(f(n), g(n)) = \theta\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right)$.


**Proof**: 

Two handy properties:
1. $max(f(n), g(n)) \le f(n) + g(n) \le 2max(f(n), g(n))$
2. $f(n)*g(n) = max(f(n), g(n)) * min(f(n), g(n))$

Notice that 
\\[
\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) = \left(\frac{max(f(n), g(n))min(f(n), g(n))}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) \qquad \text{by property 1}
\\]

Notice that
$$
\begin{align}
\left(\frac{f(n)g(n)}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) & = \left(\frac{max(f(n), g(n))min(f(n), g(n))}{f(n)+g(n)}\right) \\
& = \left(\frac{max(f(n), g(n))}{f(n)+g(n)}\right)min(f(n), g(n))
\end{align}
$$

hello $$ 2=3 $$

hello \$$ 2=3 \$$

hello \\[2=3\\]


